Distributed backward (#1088)
deepinv/deepinv: docs/source/user_guide/training/distributed.rst

.. _distributed-training:

Distributed Training
====================

The distributed framework can be used during training. This is useful when a
single inverse problem is too large for one GPU, for example because reconstruction
model processes large images or volumes.

The API is the same as for :ref:`distributed reconstruction <distributed>`:

1. :class:`deepinv.distributed.DistributedContext` manages the processes and devices
2. :func:`deepinv.distributed.distribute` converts deepinv objects to distributed versions

.. note::

>     This is different from data-parallel training. In data parallelism,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This is different from `data-parallel training offered by pytorch <https://docs.pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/ddp_tutorial.html>`_. In data parallelism,
```

            prior=PnP(denoiser),
            max_iter=5,
            unfold=True,
            trainable_params=["stepsize", "sigma_denoiser"],
        )
        model = distribute(model, ctx, patch_size=256, overlap=64)

        optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=1e-4)
        trainer = dinv.Trainer(
            model=model,
            physics=physics,
            optimizer=optimizer,
            train_dataloader=train_loader,
            eval_dataloader=val_loader,
            device=ctx.device,
            verbose=(ctx.rank == 0),
            show_progress_bar=(ctx.rank == 0),
        )
        trainer.train()

The rest of your training code can stay close to a standard
:class:`deepinv.Trainer` workflow. The distributed objects handle the
communication needed by the forward pass and by backpropagation.

.. note::

    See :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_distributed_demo_unrolled_distributed.py`
    for a complete example training an unfolded DRS model.

When to Use It
--------------

Distributed training is useful when you want to train a model but one process
cannot hold the full computation or would be too slow. Common scenarios include:

> **Many physics operators**: if your measurements come from several operators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Many physics operators**: if your measurements can be split across several sub-operators
```

        patch_size=256,
        overlap=64,
        max_batch_size=1,
    )

For unfolded models, :func:`deepinv.distributed.distribute` replaces the
denoiser inside compatible priors by a tiled distributed processor and adds
gradient synchronization for trainable parameters such as stepsizes.

**Step 4: Train as usual**

.. code-block:: python

    trainer = dinv.Trainer(
        model=model,
        physics=physics,
        device=ctx.device,
        verbose=(ctx.rank == 0),
        show_progress_bar=(ctx.rank == 0),
    )
    trainer.train()

All ranks must enter the training loop. For printing, plotting, and progress
bars, it is usually best to do the visible work only on rank 0.

Data Loading
------------

Because the framework distributes one inverse problem across ranks, the
dataloader should usually return the same batch on every rank.

In practice:

- Do not use :class:`torch.utils.data.distributed.DistributedSampler` for this use case.
- Use the same dataset, batch size, and shuffle seed on all ranks.
- Move both images and measurements to ``ctx.device``.
- If measurements are stored as a list or :class:`deepinv.utils.TensorList`, move each tensor to the device.

> This is different from data parallelism, where each process receives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is different from PyTorch's data parallelism, where each process receives
```

different samples and gradients are synchronized only between model replicas.

> 

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this means: do we need custom data loaders? If yes, can we include a small snippet of an example?

Author: It just means that we're not doing data parallelism in the usual sense which means replicating a model on several devices, then computing the gradient with different mini batches on each device and synchronizing. Here we need tiling to compute the gradient on one sample. There's no need for custom dataloaders.

.. _distributed-training:

Distributed Training
====================

> The distributed framework can be used during training. This is useful when a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The distributed framework can be used during training when a
```

> single inverse problem is too large for one GPU, for example because reconstruction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
forward model is too large for one GPU, for example because the reconstruction
```

> model processes large images or volumes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
model processes large images or volumes, and the operator acts globally over them.
```

    with DistributedContext(seed=0, seed_offset=False) as ctx:

        # distribute the forward operator
        physics = distribute(stacked_physics, ctx)

        model = DRS(
            data_fidelity=L2(),
            prior=PnP(denoiser),
            max_iter=5,
            unfold=True,
            trainable_params=["stepsize", "sigma_denoiser"],
        )

        # distribute the model
        model = distribute(model, ctx, patch_size=256, overlap=64)

        optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=1e-4)
        trainer = dinv.Trainer(
            model=model,
            physics=physics,
            optimizer=optimizer,
            train_dataloader=train_loader,
            eval_dataloader=val_loader,
            device=ctx.device,
            verbose=(ctx.rank == 0),
            show_progress_bar=(ctx.rank == 0),
        )
        trainer.train()

The rest of your training code can stay close to a standard
:class:`deepinv.Trainer` workflow. The distributed objects handle the
communication needed by the forward pass and by backpropagation.

.. note::

    See :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_distributed_demo_unrolled_distributed.py`

>     for a complete example training an unfolded DRS model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    for a complete example training an unfolded model.
```

**Many physics operators**: if your measurements can be split across several sub-operators
:math:`A_i`, the framework can split them across ranks. Each rank applies its
local operators and the results are combined automatically.

**Large images or volumes**: if your denoiser or prior is too expensive to run
on the full signal, the framework can split the signal into overlapping tiles,
process the tiles on different ranks, and blend them back together.

**Unfolded algorithms**: unfolded models such as :class:`deepinv.optim.DRS` can
be distributed in one call when they are created with ``unfold=True``. The
framework distributes their data-fidelity terms, tiled denoisers, and trainable
algorithm parameters.

Simple Training Pattern
-----------------------

**Step 1: Use a synchronized context**

.. code-block:: python

    with DistributedContext(seed=seed, seed_offset=False) as ctx:
        ...

Using ``seed_offset=False`` keeps random streams aligned across ranks. This is
important because ranks should usually consume the same data in the same order.

**Step 2: Distribute the physics**

.. code-block:: python

    physics = distribute(stacked_physics, ctx)

> For a stacked physics :math:`A = [A_1, \ldots, A_N]`, each rank owns a subset of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a :class:`stacked physics <deepinv.physics.StackedPhysics>` :math:`A = [A_1, \ldots, A_N]`, each rank owns a subset of
```

**Step 4: Train as usual**

.. code-block:: python

    trainer = dinv.Trainer(
        model=model,
        physics=physics,
        device=ctx.device,
        verbose=(ctx.rank == 0),
        show_progress_bar=(ctx.rank == 0),
    )
    trainer.train()

All ranks must enter the training loop. For printing, plotting, and progress
bars, it is usually best to do the visible work only on rank 0.

Data Loading
------------

Because the framework distributes one inverse problem across ranks, the
dataloader should usually return the same batch on every rank.

In practice:

- Do not use :class:`torch.utils.data.distributed.DistributedSampler` for this use case.
- Use the same dataset, batch size, and shuffle seed on all ranks.
- Move both images and measurements to ``ctx.device``.
- If measurements are stored as a list or :class:`deepinv.utils.TensorList`, move each tensor to the device.

This is different from Pytorch's data parallelism, where each process receives
different samples and gradients are synchronized only between model replicas.
There's no need for custom data loaders or samplers for the distributed framework,

> as long as all ranks consume the same data in the same order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as long as all ranks operate on the same image/volume.
```

How Backward Works
------------------

You normally do not need to write custom backward code. The distributed objects
are built so that PyTorch autograd can follow the full computation.

**Through distributed physics**: each rank applies its local operators
:math:`A_i`. During backward, the gradient with respect to the shared input is

> computed from local contributions and synchronized across ranks. For linear

Reviewer: Is it only working for linear physics? If yes, not sure "vector jacobian products" makes sense here
